Graphical User Interface
=====================

The Ion Mobility Dashboard was originally developed as a GUI and this guide was developed to hopefully answer all your questions related to this dashboard.



Run Overview
-------------

1) Workflow choice will be dictated by which type of experiment you are
   running. The option to run any individual tool is also available.
2) Depending on which workflow you’d like to run,a set of files and
   folders must be prepared ahead of time.
3) Enter parameter values and use a unique experiment name. Avoid spaces
   or any special characters in this name.
4) Double check parameter inputs, files, then run the experiment.
5) If AutoCCS was performed, you will be able to view a preview of the
   results. If this does not appear, the experiment likely failed.
6) Save results to folder. Do not use a duplicate folder name. Once
   results are saved, they will be removed from the application
   workspace.

First Step - Run PNNL PreProcessor
------------------------------

| At this point in time, PNNL PreProcessor has not been integrated into
  the application. This tool has two important aspects in the workflow:
  1) it filters and smooths data for quality control purposes, 2) it
  splits multi-field (.d) data into separate (.d) folders.
| This spliting function adds a suffix to (.d) folders depending on the
  ms level as follows: ms1 would be in “filename_1.d”, ms2 would be in
  “filename_2.d”, etc.
| This allows for both stepped-field and single-field to be processed in
  this application.
| For singlefield, metadata must be extracted **after** splitting raw files. 
| For steppedfield, metadata must be extracted **before** splitting raw files. 

Select your Workflow
---------------------

There are three types of workflows to run. Each mode has separate needs
for input files, but runs a combination of the modules depicted below.

**DTIMS Single field**

Drift tube ion mobility mass spectrometry requires knowledge of
experiments and a table of calibration ions.

**A Note on Proteowizard:** For the single tool option, this application
will convert all (.d) files to mzML. For the Single-Field workflow, this
application will filter out all files suspected to come from multi-field
data - this will be determined by the PNNL PreProcessor naming suffix.
If a file suffix contains any number greater than
(filename)\ **1**\ *.d, it will be removed. For example,
(filename)*\ **2**.d would be removed from this workflow.

**DTIMS Stepped field**

Drift tube ion mobility mass spectrometry that requires specific known
targets and their masses.

**A Note on AutoCCS:** For the stepped-field experiment, autoCCS does
not generate a (hidden) metadata file. Instead, it extracts the
ionization from the file name (POS or NEG). As such, any Feature files
and Ims_Metadata files run through stepped-field AutoCCS must include
POS or NEG in their names.

| **SLIM**
| Data from instrument performing Structures for Lossless Ion
  Manipulation.

Single Tool Option
------------------

This option is selected to run tools individually.

Select which tool you would like to run. Grey boxes are unavailable,
white boxes are available, and the orange box indicates which is
selected.

If AutoCCS is selected, choose single field, stepped field, or SLIM
depending on your experiment.

Prepare your Files
--------------------

Examples of each data type can be found under `test
data <https://github.com/PNNL-CompBio/ion-mob-ms/tree/main/test-data>`__
in the `github
repository <https://github.com/PNNL-CompBio/ion-mob-ms/>`__.

| **Raw Data Folder**
| Raw data is generated by vendor instruments. This data is commonly
  encoded in a propriatory format. All raw data must be together in an
  encompassing folder, some raw data types such as Agilent (.d) are
  folders themselves, these must still be isolated in an encompassing
  folder. See more details in section titled “Upload your files” below.
  Supported file types can be found on the `proteowizard
  website <https://proteowizard.sourceforge.io/doc_users.html>`__.

| **IMS Metadata Folder**
| This data is generated alongside and paired with the raw data by some
  vendors. It includes information such as instrument specifications,
  temperature deviations between runs, and electrical current changes.
  This is required for stepped field experiments and optional for single
  field experiments. Including this data for single field experiments
  improves accuracy of CCS value predictions.

| **Feature Data Folder**
| Feature files are generated by Mzmine or DEIMoS. Features, also known
  as peaks, are predicted based on signal-to-noise ratio of drift time,
  intensity, and mass/charge (m/z) ratios.

| **Target List File**
| This excel file is required for stepped field experiments. This
  contains four columns: compound name, compound ID, exact mass, unique
  ID4D file names.
| This must be created by the user with known molecules/standards and
  neutral masses in order to compare with sample data and calculate CCS
  values.

| **Metadata File**
| This hidden metadata file is generated from PreProcessed data and
  includes the following metrics: RawFileName, AcquiredTime,
  InstrumentName, IonPolarity, Well, Cartridge. This is generated in and
  required for the AutoCCS step.

| **Calibrant File**
| This text file includes calibrant information for single field
  experiments. Calibrant information includes: CCS values, mass(m),
  charge(z), m/z, and ionization.

Upload your files
--------------------

Prior to uploading files, please sort each file type into their own
folder, then select the folder by clicking “Browse”. For example, all
Raw data files should be placed in a single folder without any other
files. This includes data types such as Agilent (.d) which are folders
themselves - ie: select the encompassing folder/directory which holds
one or more raw data types, not the data files themselves.

Individual File uploads do not require folders and may be selected
directly. These include: Calibrant File, Target List File, and Metadata
File.

Once files are uploaded, select the Run tab.

Run Experiment
-------------------

**Prior** to selecting “Run Experiment”, Docker Desktop must be open.

Please confirm all variables and path locations before running
experiment.

When running experiment, do not exit the application or Docker. Doing so
may result in temporary files (such as .tar files in data folders) not
being deleted. If exited early, please ensure no temporary files exist
in experimental folders before running again.

Viewing and Saving Results
------------------------------

After an experiment is completed, a “Save Results” button should appear.
Select this button to find a folder to save results at.

If CCS Values were generated, a summary graph or PDF will be available
to preview depending on the experiment type.

Running Additional Experiments
---------------------------------

To clear all parameters and results, select the “Clear Experiment”
button and confirm. Save results before clearing or they will be lost.

Errors and Troubleshooting
==========================

| **Docker Errors**
| Connectivity issues between Docker Desktop and UI_V2 may lead to
  issues with experiments completing. When an error message is seen in
  the console, check which data file was running, then manually
  **Delete** all containers in docker desktop and **restart** both
  applications. Last, check data files to ensure that no intermediate
  files (.tar extension) were left behind.

The most common connectivity timeout error may occur when the computer
logs out or enters sleep mode partway through a run. This issue becomes
more frequent when Docker Desktop is not restarted between runs.

The first time the application uses a tool, the container is pulled from
dockerhub (which is updated via github). This first pull event may be
slow but afterwards, it will be faster. One issue that may occur here is
once a container is pulled, it will not automatically update to the
latest version. To update to the latest version, you must navigate to
the “Images” tab in Docker Desktop, then “clean up” or remove images.
Once the application is run again, it will automatically update to the
latest version.

Two docker containers with the same name can not be run at the same
time, ensure that all files have unique names and no docker containers
are running or stopped before starting an experiment (these must be
deleted).

| **Recovering Data**
| When a docker container exits on its own, its experiment was completed
  successfully. When left running indefinitely, it has failed. To
  retrieve any data from partial runs, see the message console to find
  the location or “Working Directory” of the run. Data is deleted upon
  exit of the application and must be retrieved before then.

| **Docker Setup on Windows**
| Docker requires WSL2 to be enabled. This should be automatically
  enabled, is not enter “Settings”, then on the “General” page, select
  the box titled “Use the WSL 2 based engine”. Then select “Apply and
  Restart”.

| **Current Issues Exist with DEIMos in the workflow**
| DEIMos generates a slightly different output from mzMine, autoCCS
  requires the mzMine values. DEIMos has received some modifications to
  allow it to work, however some small differences exist. DEIMos is best
  suited for single field usage at this time.

DEIMos is a very efficient and accurate tool that also outperforms
mzMine in terms of speed. However, the current version is not entirely
compatible with usage in a docker container and as such, it runs slower
than expected and may run into memory issues. We hope this can be
resolved in future versions of this application. We also hope to
incorporate additional DEIMos functions in the future.
